---
title: OS Concept Essentials 03 - Processes
---



# OS Concepts Essentials 04 - Threads

*Date of creation: 2021-2-4*

Source:

*[Operating System Concepts Essentials **(2nd Edition)**](http://os-book.com/)*, Avi Silberschatz, Peter Galvin, and Greg Gagne, John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, 2013, pp. 163-202.



## Overview

### Motivation

- Similar tasks, shared information
- Need for message sharing intra- or inter-process
- Multiprocessing

### Benefits

- Responsiveness
- Resource sharing
- Economy
- Scalability



## Multicore Programming

### Programming Challenges

- Identifying tasks
- Balance
- Data splitting
- Data dependency
- Testing and debugging

### Types of Parallelism

- Data parallelism
- Task parallelism



## Multithreading Models

Two levels: user threads/kernel threads

- Many-to-one
- One-to-one (Linux)
- Many-to-many/two-layer



## Thread Libraries

- User space without kernel support
- Kernel-level library supported directly by operating system

Examples:

- POSIX Pthreads (UNIX/Linux)
- Windows (Windows)
- Java (JVM)
  - no global data, passed as parameter to thread class



## Implicit Threading

*Only include thread pools here*

Motivation: easy to program

Thread pool: create a number of threads at process startup and place them into a pool, where they sit and wait for work (179).

Pros:

- Servicing a request with an existing thread is faster than waiting to create a thread
- A thread pool limits the number of thread that exist at one point
- Allows us to use different strategies for running the task. e.g., the task could be scheduled to execute after a time delay or to execute periodically



## Threading Issues

### Semantic Problem for `fork()` and `exec()`

What data will be copied if `fork()` is called from a thread?



### Signal Handling

Signal:

- generated by the occurence of a particular event
- delivered to a process
- must be handled (by user-defined routine or by default) once delivered

Signals can be classified as:

- asynchronous: SIGINT
- synchronous: division by 0, illegal memory access



Question: If a process has several threads, where should a signal be delivered? Some options:

- To the thread to which the signal applies
- To every thread in the process
- To certain threads in the process
- Assign a specific thread to receive all signals for the process

Actual choice depends on the type of the signal generated:

- Synchronous: to the specific thread causing the signal
- Asynchronous: not clear, depends on specific signal

UNIX way of delivering signal:

```c
kill(pid_t pid, int signal);
```

Libraries allow a thread to sepcifiy which signals it will accept and which it will block. A signal is typically delivered only to the first thread found that is not blocking it.



### Thread Cancellation

The thread to be cancalled is called target thread.

- Asynchronous: one thread immediately terminates the target thread
- Deferred: target thread periodically checks whether it should terminate

Pthreads provides different cancellation modes. To do deferred cancellation, define cancellation point:

```c
while (1)
{
  /* do some work */
  
  /* check if there is a cancellation request */
  pthread_testcancel();
}
```



### Thread-Local Storage

TLS is not equivalent to local variable, e.g., could separate in several functions.



### Scheduler Activations

Deal with communication between the kernel and the thread library

Place an intermediate data structure between user and kernel threads: lightweight process (LWPs)

- Virtual processoron which the application can schedule and run
- Each LWP is attached to a kernel thread
- An LWP is required for each concurrent blocking system call



## Linux Example

Dependent on the flags passed to `clone()`

- Point to data or copy data (regardless of CoW)